Kwe.
Hello.
Bonjour.
My name is Andrew Caldwell and I am a Policy Analyst
with Employment and Social Development Canada.
I am status Algonquin, Anishinaabe, First Nations and Settler descent from the Kitigan Zibi,
Anishinabeg community located in Maniwaki, Quebec.
My Anishinaabe name is Wa-Wa-Ti-In-In-Ne, which means Northern Lights Man.
My personal colors are green and white and my clan colors are red and black from the Bear Clan.
I identify as Two-Spirit, although my peers experience me as androgynous at times,
I fall into, I present as a cis-gender, a cis-normative male.
My preferred pronouns are he, him and they.
My Kokomis, Algonquin grandmother, was sent to residential school in Spanish,
Ontario and was directly impacted by colonization.
She died at a young age in a car accident, and her children were raised in foster homes.
My mother, who raised me, was one of those children.
My mother and her siblings grew up not knowing each other,
as a result of being in the Sixties Scoop system.
They also grew up not knowing about their Algonquin culture or spirituality,
as a result of the effects of the residential school and being in the Sixties Scoop system.
My mother, however, shares that she remembers her mother being a Medicine Woman
and that she was able to heal physical and emotional wounds with plants from Mother Earth.
My mother raised my sister and I on her own, and as a child I recall seeing her oppressed
and discriminated against because of the color of her skin
and her long black hair, because she looked Indigenous.
And she did her very best to raise my late sister and I as she waited on tables and she cleaned houses.
And as a result of being in the foster care system
and in view of her mother being a residential school survivor, she did not have parenting skills.
However, she was very supportive of my development as a child.
I did not know if I was a boy or a girl, but I knew I was attracted to other males.
I knew that I was different from others, and she allowed me,
my mother and my late sister to be who I was.
They supported my love for pop star Madonna, where I used to dance around and sing to her videos.
And I had long hair as a child and I was very flamboyant
and both of them were very supportive of my development and celebrated who I was.
And throughout my school years, I struggled with my gender identity
and my gender expression, sexual orientation and having Indigenous heritage.
I have been subjected to homophobia, transphobia and racism.
And during this time in my life I lacked direction and clarity in my life, so I was encouraged by my
mother to attend a healing center up in Kitimat at Wilp Si'Satxw Healing Center.
I realized that my life was going nowhere and I made the decision to attend.
And it was at Wilp Si'Satxw where a female Elder told me that if I did not deal with who I was,
in terms of my gender identity and sexual orientation, that things would get worse for me.
The Elder informed me that I was Two-Spirit, which meant I was given male and female energy.
She told me that this was a sacred gift
because I could understand and mediate between both genders.
As gifts from the Creator, the Elder told me that it was important to continue
on my healing journey in order to embrace the gift of having two spirits.
After that moment, I remember feeling at ease and very grounded.
Indigenous Nations have had specific language and terminology for gender identity,
expression and sexual orientation since time immemorial.
Due to the impacts of colonization and the residential school experience,
many nations are working on reclaiming their traditional language and practices.
The term Two-Spirited is attributed to Albert McLeod, who proposed its use
during the Third Annual Inter-Tribal Native American, First Nations, Gay and Lesbian
American Conference, held in Winnipeg in 1990, in order for Indigenous LGBTQ+
community members to have an urban expression for their identity.
Two-Spirit is an English term that can be defined as an Indigenous identity that is gender variant
or of same sex attraction or pansexual and of spiritual and cultural roles.
The definition of Two-Spirit does not neatly fit into the Eurocentric
categories of gender identity and gender expression as they vary from tribe or nation.
It is important to note that the complexities of Indigenous histories and practices,
the concept of Two-Spirit does not apply to all Indigenous identities.
Due to European contact, the Two-Spirit identity was denied by many Indigenous communities.
It is important to decolonize the Two-Spirit identity
so it can reclaim its traditional role within the Indigenous communities.
Various Indigenous activists and scholars are now working towards this reclamation.
In current day, there are trainings and workshops for individuals who seek to gain an understanding
of the Two-Spirit identity and explore ways to build respectful relationships
and foster vibrant communities amongst Two-Spirit and Indigenous LGBTQ+ people.
The Two-Spirit community is actively working towards reclaiming
their unique status in their communities.
As a Two-Spirit person, I continue to seek the language and more teachings
on what it looked like within my Algonquin community.
I am proud to be working for the public service as I feel included and celebrated
for who I am as a diverse employee and grateful to connect
with others in the Equity and Diversity Networks.
Thank you for listening to me.
All my relations. Chi-Miigwetch. Merci.